Every day the Department of Health posts the latest information from its vaccine statistics dashboard on its SA Coronavirus website. At present the numbers shown on the dashboard are a snapshot as at 17:00 on a particular day. We use data from the dashboard in this vaccinations table, to track the proportion of adults in each province who have received a vaccine. By adults, we mean people 18 years and older. This is the target population of the vaccination roll-out. We got the estimated number of people over 18 in South Africa from Statistics South Africa, as well as the estimated number of people over the age of 60 years. South Africa is using two vaccines, the one-dose Johnson & Johnson shot and the two-dose Pfizer. People who receive a Johnson & Johnson shot are fully vaccinated, but the Department of Health’s dashboard does not separate the people vaccinated with Johnson & Johnson vaccines from those who received a Pfizer jab. This means that, at present, we don’t know how many people are fully vaccinated. All we know is that the nearly 480 000 health workers who were vaccinated with Johnson & Johnson shots during the Sisonke study are fully immunised. Most of the other 2-million people have received one-dose of Pfizer vaccine, but on 23 June a programme started to vaccinate 580 000 teachers and school workers using Johnson & Johnson shots, they will be fully vaccinated and are included in the 2-million total. We will update the table when information about who has been fully vaccinated is made available. The health department vaccination dashboard has a disclaimer that states: “Data displayed in this dashboard only contains vaccination records captured on the live Electronic Vaccination Data System (EVDS) and excludes vaccination records captured on paper within the last 24 hours. Totals will be adjusted as back-capturing and data validation are done.” This mean that the number of vaccinations administered per day, which is used in the Covid-19 vaccinations in SA widget and calculated by subtracting today’s total vaccinations from yesterday’s total, is often different from the number of vaccinations administered in the last 24 hours that appears on the health department’s dashboard.