On 4 June, the national health department issued a circular on how COVID vaccination sites should handle ‘walk-in’ vaccinees. We read through the document so you don’t have to. We answer four questions about what this means for people trying to secure a jab without an appointment. Right now, COVID-19 vaccines in South Africa are only available to people of 60 and older and healthcare workers. The health department will make an announcement when other age groups become eligible. People of 60 and older who want to get vaccinated need to register on the government’s electronic vaccine data system (EVDS). There are five ways to register: on the internet, on WhatsApp, via USSD code on your phone, in-person at a vaccination site and through community health workers sent to your community by the department of health. The Western Cape also has 75 centres with computers, internet access and assistants available in communities which residents can visit to register. Once registered you will get an initial sms confirming your registration. A second sms will be sent with details of your appointment. Vaccine sites are encouraged to notify you of your appointment at least three days before it is scheduled, when possible. At this stage, healthcare workers can’t register on the EVDS. Instead, a new registration platform has been set-up for health workers at www.v4hcw.co.za. This new platform was created to prevent people from falsely registering on the system as healthcare workers in order to get vaccinated. It was created by the national health department and the Unity Forum for Family Practitioners following concerns that the EVDS was being exploited by people who were not actually healthcare workers. All healthcare workers who have already registered with their professional body and who were previously registered on the EVDS will automatically be transferred onto this new database. Details of how healthcare workers who are not registered with a professional body such as the South African Medical Association or the South African Nursing Council, can register will be announced by the health department soon. Yes — but only if you are in the current qualifying category set by the department of health. At this time that only applies to people over the age of 60. It is up to the vaccine site manager to decide if they will accept walk-in vaccinees on a particular day. But accepting walk-ins does come with a few rules: Vaccine sites in the public and private sectors can choose to accept walk-ins, but there’s a catch. For the most part, the government won’t pay for walk-ins of people without medical aid at private vaccine sites. So if you’re a walk-in vaccinee at a private sector site and you’re not covered by medical aid, it is likely that you will be referred to a public sector site such as a government hospital. The only exception applies to people over the age of 80, who will be covered by the state if they don’t have medical aid. But the government has placed a limit on how many people within this group will be covered. Only 5% of a site’s allocated doses may go towards these walk-ins and still be covered by the government. For example, if a private sector site is allocated enough vaccines for 100 people, they can vaccinate five uninsured people over the age of 80 and the state will pay for those vaccinations. The sixth person over 80 to walk-in will likely be referred to a public sector site or alternatively be told to return on another day. This only applies to people who decide to walk-in at a private vaccine site. Should you be allocated to a private site by EVDS — even without medical aid — the government will cover the cost of your vaccine. It is completely free to get a COVID vaccine — regardless of your insurance. No one may be charged anything at a vaccination site when receiving their jab. The vaccine cost will be covered by the state for those without insurance or by your medical aid scheme, if you belong to one. The EVDS will automatically assign patients without medical insurance to public sites and those with medical aid to private sites. Only in cases where there is a lack of space at a site, will this rule not be followed. The cost of vaccinations of all people without insurance, who are given appointments at a private site, will be covered by the government. If you belong to a medical scheme and are assigned to a public site, your medical aid would have to cover the cost. Aisha Abdool Karim is a senior health reporter at Bhekisisa.