South Africa will be in an adjusted level 4 lockdown for 14 days from 28 June to 11 July to curb an alarming spike in SARS-CoV-2 infections across the country.  Scientists explained in a televised address on Saturday that a new variant of the virus called the Delta variant (first identified in India) was driving infections in the country, particularly in KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng. The Delta variant is the most transmissible of the SARS-CoV-2 variants circulating worldwide, which spreads from person to person faster than other variants. Read more about the variant here. The restrictions will be re-evaluated in two weeks time, Ramaphosa explained on Sunday. For now, here’s how to stay within the law. Stay home between 21:00 and 04:00, the gazetted regulations say. If you don’t adhere to the curfew you can be fined or face six months’ jail time. This doesn’t apply if you’re seeking emergency medical attention, or if you have a boarding pass to prove you were on a flight which forced you to be on the road after curfew. READ MORE: Understanding the 3 COVID variants circulating during SA’s third wave Leisure travel to and from Gauteng is illegal for the next two weeks.  People can travel to Gauteng for work if they have a letter from their employer. Gauteng residents have a once-off chance to return home if they were elsewhere when the regulations came into effect. Mourners can travel to and from funerals held in Gauteng granted they have a letter from a magistrate’s office or police station. Those transporting human remains are allowed to move through the province as are learners who commute to a school or tertiary institution in a different province daily. You can move around the Gauteng province if you’re moving house or if you have an affidavit to prove that you’re travelling to take care of an immediate family member. South Africa’s definition of a gathering under the Disaster Management Act includes people coming together on roads or inside buildings whether they are partly or completely in the open air. The only exception is a workplace and a residential home (but it’s only legal for the usual residents to be there). So, you can’t host any dinner parties at your home. Otherwise, all gatherings, both indoor and outdoor, are banned too until 11 July. Here’s a list of places where gatherings are prohibited. Organisers and attendants of gatherings at the places listed above can be fined or jailed. READ MORE: Hindsight is 2020: Three lessons from our second wave The only exceptions are funerals, when you’re at work, or when you’re shopping for goods and services. You can still go to the following places: Buffets and dining rooms at these venues, however, are a no-go, and food and non-alcoholic beverages can only be delivered to guests’ rooms. These premises must close by 8pm so that employees can get home before curfew. Schools, universities, colleges and technical schools must stop in-person classes from 30 June. Only 50 people may attend funerals and everyone must wear a face mask for the duration of the event. If the funeral venue is too small for 50 people to stand 1.5 metres apart, the rule of thumb should be half the venue’s capacity. Night vigils, after-funeral gatherings and “after tears” gatherings are prohibited. No – and no. You can go to a restaurant, but you won’t be able to sit down since food and non-alcoholic beverages will only be available for take-aways. All alcohol sales are illegal until 11 July. It’s illegal to transport alcohol unless it’s being used to produce hand sanitisers and disinfectants, soap and household cleaning products. Joan van Dyk is a senior health journalist at Bhekisisa.