When there was no national list of South Africa’s termination of pregnancy services, Bhekisisa set out on a national telephonic marathon to find them. The result was #SizaMap, the country’s first online map of abortion and other family planning services. Termination of pregnancy services are fragile. Very often, they depend upon a single midwife at a facility who is willing to do the job. When that midwife leaves, the service disappears. So, #SizaMap is, essentially, unsustainable. Why? Because keeping the map updated would require a dedicated team – something Bhekisisa is unable to do on its own. Enter the Triad Trust. They’ve taken the idea for #SizaMap and ironed out all the kinks. Their team has trained teams of people to keep the map updated, and they’ve got the coding know-how to make it all run smoothly. It’s called the Where to Care App and it’s free to use. Check it out here. So, instead of building our own database, we’re working on a database together with the Triad Trust  – and that’s where you come in. We’re looking for people with basic knowledge of issues around sexual and reproductive health, family planning, and gender-based violence. You don’t need expert-level intel, but you’d need to know your condoms from your intrauterine devices – or have basic googling skills. You would also need the ability to complete a daily communication report and a weekly timesheet on Google Forms. Bhekisisa can provide an office space with internet and telephones that you can use. The most important trait? You need to be comfortable asking questions about topics such as abortion and issues related to gender-based violence including rape and assualt. Fair warning: These are tricky topics and you may have the phone slammed down in your ear on some attempts. Yes. You’ll get an hourly wage in line with the Where to Care data collection team’s rates. Bhekisisa will pay for three months of work, after that you could become a permanent part of the Triad Trust’s team. Is this you? Send your CV to us at health@bhekisisa.org with the subject line “Where to Care application”. Don’t miss the deadline –  23 April 2020 at midnight.